We are tracking
breaking news out of the Middle East.
An attack on Iran's consulate
building in Syria.
Iran's ambassador was not hurt,
but he told reporters in Damascus at least
five people were killed and blamed
Israeli warplanes for the strike.
Now, CNN cannot independently verify
those claims.
Our Nic Robertson, though, is here
and is following
all the breaking news story on this.
And Nic, this is a significant target.
What more
are you learning about this attack?
Well, the ambassador says
he was an eyewitness to it
because the embassy is right
next to the consular building,
the consulate building destroyed.
He says at least five people were killed.
One of them, according to Iranian state
media, was Brigadier General Mohammad
Reza Zaidi, who is a very, very senior
IRGC top military commander.
Has commanded the IRGC Army ground forces
before, the air forces before.
And it is believed at this time
that he is the most senior IRGC
figure to be killed since the Quds Force
commander, Kassam Suleimani, was killed
by the United States in a drone
strike early.
20. 20.
Take that with the fact that this was
a diplomatic building that was hit.
That hasn't happened before.
Now, the ambassador, Syrian media,
Iranian media are blaming Israel
typically in these situations
because there have been situations like
this before where Israel has been blamed
and has actually accepted responsibility
for some strikes against Iranian targets.
Inside of Syria.
Typically,
the Israeli government at the moment
is saying that we don't comment on
what foreign media is saying.
The Iranians and the Syrian media.
So this is a sort of a a statement
that we can expect Israel to give.
But the indications are this would be
a target of high value to Israel.
And the ambassador said that it was,
as you mentioned,
Israeli fighter jet, F-35,
that fired in six missiles.
I mean, broaden this out then.
If it is Israel and we we don't know
at this stage if it is Israel.
The implications here for a region
that already
is, you know, on the edge,
what will this mean?
How will Iran, you know,
how will Iran react to this,
to set the scene
from Israel side for a moment,
they've been talking
about the northern northern border,
their northern border,
the southern border of Lebanon.
As being a place
that needs a diplomatic solution.
And there are tensions with Hezbollah.
That's a proxy of Iran.
And they've been saying that window
opportunity has been closing
and they've been saying that the window of
opportunity is going to be closing soon.
And the discussion
has been about mid-April.
So Israel at the moment
is really on the front foot in terms of
wanting to have power strikes
against Hezbollah
if they are responsible for this strike
on such a significant Iranian target.
And the ambassador said that
that would be a decisive response.
The Iranian foreign ministry spokesman,
according to Iranian
media, is saying that they have a right
to take a response.
The Iranian foreign minister is saying
the international community
should do something.
This potentially stokes up the tensions
between Iran and Israel.
And in that context,
Israel would anticipate that
that response
could very likely come from Hezbollah.
And if it did, then that would give Israel
a rationale to strike Hezbollah harder.
And this is what the United States fears.
This is what European Union officials
fear.
This is why Secretary of State
Antony Blinken is meeting tomorrow
with with the French president in Paris.
And they will discuss this issue of
of Lebanon, Israel, Syria, Iran.
It's in
this context, the tensions on it
very, very high right now.
Yeah, the risk of escalation here
clearly, clearly very high.
And this is something like you
said, that Secretary Blinken
has been going to the region.
They're going to accept No. Five, six.
I can't remember
trying to keep a lid on this.
So we're looking I mean, what is the US
saying at this juncture?
That I haven't heard
what they've said so far?
And it's not clear
if Israel was to take
responsibility for it,
then I think we could expect to hear
something publicly from
from the United States.
If you go back to just after Christmas,
there was a senior IRGC figure,
not anywhere near as senior as this one,
an adviser to two Syrian forces
who was killed by a strike
around Damascus just just after Christmas.
Again, Israel at that time
said they weren't responsible.
But later on, Israeli officials
admitted that they were responsible
for that strike.
The United States is trying its best
to de-escalate those tensions.
It wants the cease fire.
And in Gaza,
meanwhile, Israel has got 100,000 people
who can't go home
along the northern border
because it's too dangerous
because of the escalation in tensions.
And there is some in the military
and political establishment
in Israel
who believe that this is a necessary time
to to take out to take out
Hezbollah's military capability.
So it's it's it's coming.
Is this a spark to set off the tinderbox
Everything we've seen so far,
Israel has calculated
and I was just looking at an interview
I did with a former head of Israeli
military intelligence a few months ago.
And he said so far everything
Israel has done has been within a red line
not to cause Iran to escalate
because Iran knows it has a lot at stake
at the moment.
Is this another calculation by Israel
taking it right?
So the one we don't know.
And what is Iran's response
How big response?
When Kassam Suleimani was dead.
Let's start with a conversation
about the breaking news.
We led the hour with the apparent strike
on the Iranian consulate
building in Damascus, Syria.
The Iranian ambassador
pointing the finger at Israel.
Israel says it doesn't comment
on foreign media reports.
What do you make of the attack
and the likelihood
that this was potentially the IDF?
Well, it seems that's
the highest likelihood that it was
the IDF.
Not a certainty.
It's a fascinating
and in some ways a risky move
You're going to now bet
about how the Iranians will respond.
The Israelis,
until now, have taken the position
that they will go after Iranian commanders
or anyone else who they believe
were masterminds
behind the attacks on Israelis
from Lebanon and all that.
But the problem is here that they are
still deeply engaged in Gaza.
And the whole effort has been to keep
this war from spreading to the north.
And this may well give the Iranians
an excuse to do that.
Until now, as you've heard from Natasha
Bertrand.
We've seen something of a calming down
and this could undo all of that
and inflame the situation pretty quickly.
David, put that into context for us
in the prism of where Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu is right now,
because he is at a point of vulnerability
as we've watched these protests
escalate over recent days
and especially into the weekend, as we saw
with Melissa Bell, with tents being set up
outside the Israeli parliament.
What is the significance
of the timing here?
Well,
there are two possibilities
that come immediately to mind.
One is that the timing was merely
a military
moment of opportunity.
Where they knew
where these commanders were
and they had an open shot at them
and and one where
they thought they might be able
to minimize civilian casualties, although
right now we don't know what
those casualties may have been.
The other is that Prime Minister Netanyahu
sees the risk of an expanded war
as politically beneficial potentially
to him, that, you know, his entire reason
for staying in office
has been to defend Israel
in the wake of the October seven attacks.
And, of course,
the American concern is that
he has done this in the hardest
possible way,
in a way that has cost
at least 30,000 lives so far.
And those protests that you saw Mark,
sort of the end of that period of grace
that Netanyahu had, where the Israelis
sort of took the view that
even if he was not their preferred leader,
he was their wartime leader.
And you're now seeing that fracture.
He may see some benefit
in the war revving up.